# History

C++ was first implemented in 1979 as "C with classes" bu Bjarne Stroustrup at
Bell Labs.

It was designed to keep the efficiency and low-level power of C and add
on add-on Object-Oriented programming features such as classes, inheritance,
and templates (generics).

It was renamed C++ in 1983. *The C++ Programming Language* was published in 1985.

In comparison to other high level languages like Java and Python, C++
is more efficient because of its lack of a garbage collector. It is up
to the programmers to correctly and efficiently manage their memory.

In our brief introduction to C++, we'll discuss **namespaces**,
how to write classes and use inheritance, and C++'s implementation
of generics called **templates**.

# Namespaces

C++ does not have "packages" like java.

We can include libraries, but this is a raw import of all classes and functions
in those librarys.

Java packages are hierarchical. We have `adventure_game.items.HealingPotion`.

The package is part of the identifier for HealingPotion so if we have a HealingPotion in
another package, we can distinctly refer to it through its package.

Library includes, on the other hand are flat. There is no hiearchical information
or unique identifiers.

In C/C++, we can't include any libraries which have functions that have identical names.

If we end up with naming conflicts.

In C, MAJOR PROBLEMN. What do we do?

As a programmer, we have two choices:

1. edit the source code to eliminate naming conflicts

2. only use one of the libraries

No. Good.

The hack among library developers is to make their function names unique by prepending
or appending some unique token to them.

Example [OpenGL](https://registry.khronos.org/OpenGL-Refpages/es3/)

**Namespaces** allows us to place classes and functions under some specific name in order
to avoid naming conflicts

To create a namespace, we create a namespace block and put our features within it.

```C++
namespace universe
{
    typedef struct point3D {
        double x;
        double y;
        double z;
    } point3D;

    typedef struct atom {
        char* name;
        point3D coords;
    } atom;
}

int main() {
    universe::atom c = {"c", {0, 0, 0}};
}
```

alternatively:

```C++
using namespace universe;
int main() {
    atom c = {"c", {0, 0, 0}};
}
```

## strings!

Strings are defined in the `std` namespace and including 
`length`, `substr`, and `compare`.

# Object-Oriented Programming

Declaring a class in C++

```C++
#include <iostream>
using namespace std;
typedef struct point3D {
    double x;
    double y;
    double z;
} point3D;

class Atom {
    string name;
    point3D coords;

    public:

    Atom(string name, double x, double y, double z) {
        this->name = name;
        coords.x = x;
        coords.y = y;
        coords.z = z;
    }

    void print() {
        cout << "Element: " << this->name << endl;
    }
}; // class definitions end in a semicolon

int main() {
    Atom* c = new Atom("C", 0, 0, 0);
    c->print();
}
``` 

We can write classes all in a single file, but we typically split them
into two files: the **header** and the **source**.

The **header** contains the class definition (includes attributes and methods)
and the **source** contains all method implementations.

# Object Construction and Destruction

In C++, we can write:
- Constructor
- Destructors
- Copy Constructors

All three have default versions which are automatically supplied if we
don't explicitly write them.

## Constructors

All programs have a standard memory structure. There are two major segments
of memory: The **stack** (consisting of function stack frames) and the **heap**.

The **heap** is used for all dynamically allocated memory (every `malloc` call
allocated memory on the heap, all objects constructed using the `new` allocates
those object on the heap.)

All values stored in the stack by some function will be freed when that function
returns.

All values stored in the heap will continue to exist until they are explicitly
freed.

In C++, we can choose to construct objects on the stack or the heap.

```C++
Atom* c = new Atom("C", 0, 0, 0); // on the heap
Atom oxygen("O", 1, 2, 3); // on the stack

c->print() // use pointer notation
oxygen.print() // use dot notation
delete c;
```

When the `new` keywork, the object is created on the heap and pointer
to it is returned by the constructor.

All objects created on the heap must be explicitly freed or your program
will have a memory leak.

The syntax for freeing an object `o` is:

`delete o;`

# Destructors

When you `delete` some object, its destructor is called and its memory
is released.

If the object has attributes that themselves use dynamically allocated memory,
then they need to be deallocated. This is the job of the destructor.

```C++
~Atom() {
    // all deallocation instructions go here.
}
```

For example, if we extended our program to include proteins constructed out of
atoms, the protein destructor's jobs would be to deallocate all of the atoms.

## Copy Constructors

A copy constructor's job is to create a copy of the object.

There is a difference between a **deep** copy and a **shallow** copy.

A **deep** copy of an object copies all of the components of that object.

For example, a deep copy of a protein would create copies of all atoms
in that protein.

A **shallow** copy might have all atom variables point to the original atoms.
If you modify any atom, that change is reflected in both copies of the protein.

Copy constructors are automatically called if an object is passed to a function
by value. The copy constructor is NOT called the object is passed in by
reference.

## Inheritance in C++

C++ has inheritance, superclasses, function overriding, and polymorphism.

There are a few differences between Java and C++.

In C++:
    - A class can directly inherit from multiple classes.
    - All functions aren't automatically overridable.
        - must specify if a function can be overridden.

### Overriding methods

To specify that a method can be overriden, must declare it
as `virtual`.

To declare an abstract method, we assign 0 into the
function declaration.

What does this mean?

The C++ compiler builds a table of pointers from functions
to their instructions. By setting a function as 0, we
are saying there are no instructions.

Why no keyword? The author of C++ didn't think could get
another keyword approved for the language.