# History

C++ was first implement at Bell Labs in 1979 as "C with classes"
by Bjarne Stroustrup.

It was designed to keep the efficiency and low-level power of C
and add on Object-Oriented programming features such classes,
inheritance, and templates (generics).

It was renamed to C++ in 1983.

In our introduction to C++, we'll discuss **namespaces**, 
how to write classes and use inheritance, and C++'s
implementation of generics, **templates**.

## Namespaces

In C, all function names need to be unique. If we include multiple libraries which
have functions that share names, we get naming conflicts. It won't compile.

As a programmer, we can solve this by:

1. Editing the source code of one of the libraries to eliminate naming conflicts.
2. Not using one of the libraries.

Libraries developers avoid this issue by prepending or appending unique tokens to
their function names.

Example: [OpenGL](https://registry.khronos.org/OpenGL-Refpages/es3/)

In C++, we avoid these issues by using namespaces.

Example:

```C++
namespace universe {
    typedef struct point3D {
        double x;
        double y;
        double z;
    } point3D;

    typedef struct atom {
        point3D coords;
        char name[2];
    } atom;
}

int main() {
    universe::atom c = {"C", {0,0,0}};
}
```

alternatively

```C++
using namespace universe;
int main() {
    atom c = {"C", {0,0,0}};
}
```

# Object-Oriented Programming

Declaring a class in C++

```C++
using namespace std;
typedef struct point3D {
    double x;
    double y;
    double z;
} point3D;

class Atom {
    string name;
    point3D coords;

    public:
    Atom(string name, double x, double y, double z) {
        this->name = name;
        coords.x = x;
        coords.y = y;
        coords.z = z;
    }

    void print() {
        cout << "Element: " << this->name << endl;
    }
}; // class definitions end in a semicolon
```

We can write classes all in a single file, but we typically split them
into two files: the **header** and the **source**.

The **header** contains the class definition (includes attributes and
methods), and the **source** contains the implementations.

# Object Construction and Destruction

In C++, we can write:
- Constructors
- Copy Constructors
- Destructors

All three have default versions automatically provided if we don't
explicitly write them.

## Constructors

All programs have a standard memory structure. There are two major segments:
the **stack** (consists of function stack frames with each function's local
variables) and the **heap** (for dynamically allocated memory).

The **heap** stores all memory allocated using the `malloc` call and also
all objects instantiated using the `new` keyword.

All values stored in the stack (always local function variables) will be
freed when that function returns.

All values stored in the heap will continue to exist until they are
explicitly freed.

In C++, we can choose to construct objects on the heap or on the stack.

``` C++
Atom* c = new Atom("C", 0, 0, 0); // on the HEAP
Atom oxygen("O", 1, 2, 3); // on the STACK

c->print() // use the pointer notation
oxygen.print() // use the dot notation

delete c; // free the memory for c
```

When the `new` keyword if used, the object is created on the heap and a
pointer to it is returned by the constructor

All objects created on the heap must be explicitly freed or your program
will have a memory leak.

Use `delete obj` to call on the destructor to free the memory for the object
`obj`.

# Destructors

The job of a destructor is to free the memory for some object.

```C++
~Atom() {
    // all deallocation instructions go here
}
```
If the object has attributes that themselves have been dynamically allocated,
the destructor should free them.

For example, if we extended this program to include proteins constructed out
of atoms, the protein destructor's job would be deallocate all of the atoms.

# Copy Constructors

A copy constructor's job is to create a copy of the object.

There is a difference between a **deep** copy and a **shallow** copy
of an object.

A **deep** copy copies all of the components of some object.

For example, a deep copy of a protein would create copies of all atoms
in that protein.

A **shallow** copy might just have the atoms of the new protein point
to the atoms of the old protein. If you change any atom, that change
will be reflected in both copies of the protein.

In C++, when an object is passed by value to a function, its copy
constructor is automatically called and a copy of it is passed
to the function.

If it is passed, a copy is not created.

## Inheritance in C++

C++ has inheritance, superclasses, function overriding, and polymorphism.

Two differences between Java and C++:
- A class can directly inherit from multiple classes
- All functions aren't automatically overridable
    - must specify if a function can be overridden